>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, DECEMBER 3: A DEADLY
FIRE ENGULFS A WAREHOUSE PARTY
IN OAKLAND, CALIFORNIA, IN WHAT
OFFICIALS ARE CALLING A "MASS
CASUALTY EVENT"; PRESIDENT-ELECT
TRUMP REACHES OUT TO WORLD
LEADERS AND DISRUPTS DIPLOMATIC
PROTOCOL WITH CHINA AND OTHER
NATIONS; AND IN OUR SIGNATURE
SEGMENT, HOW RESTORED DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS HAVE BOOSTED TRADE
BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND
CUBA, SLOWLY.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
EMERGENCY RESPONDERS IN OAKLAND,
CALIFORNIA, SPENT THE DAY
SEARCHING THE SITE OF A MASSIVE
FATAL FIRE THAT BROKE OUT JUST
BEFORE MIDNIGHT AND BURNED DOWN
A TWO-STORY WAREHOUSE WHERE SOME
PEOPLE LIVED AND OTHERS GATHERED
FOR PARTIES AND PERFORMANCES.
OAKLAND MAYOR LIBBY SCHAAF CALLS
THE FIRE AN IMMENSE TRAGEDY.
SHE ALSO SAYS THE BUILDING WAS
PERMITTED ONLY AS A WAREHOUSE,
NOT AS A RESIDENCE OR A
PERFORMANCE SPACE.
FIRE OFFICIALS SAY THEY CAN
CONFIRM NINE DEATHS, BUT AS MANY
AS 25 PEOPLE ARE UNACCOUNTED
FOR.
SERGEANT RAY KELLY, SPOKESMAN
FOR THE ALAMEDA COUNTY SHERRIF,
SAID:
THE WAREHOUSE HAD BEEN CONVERTED
INTO ARTIST STUDIOS AND
RESIDENCES, AND AN EVENT SPACE
KNOWN LOCALLY AS THE GHOST SHIP.
AN ELECTRONIC MUSIC PARTY WAS
UNDER WAY WHEN THE FIRE STARTED.
AN ESTIMATED 50 TO 100 PEOPLE
WERE IN THE BUILDING AT THE
TIME.
OAKLAND'S FIRE CHIEF SAYS THE
BUILDING HAD NO SPRINKLERS AND
ITS ROOF COLLAPSED.
>> THERE WAS JUST THE ONE WAY UP
AND DOWN FROM THE SECOND FLOOR.
AND IT'S MY UNDERSTANDING THAT
THAT STAIRWELL WAS KIND OF LIKE
A MAKESHIFT, THAT THEY PUT IT
TOGETHER WITH PALLETS.
>> Stewart: THE CAUSE OF THE
FIRE IS UNDER INVESTIGATION.
PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD TRUMP HAS
IGNITED A DIPLOMATIC CONTROVERSY
WITH CHINA BECAUSE OF ONE PHONE
CALL WITH TAIWAN.
BREAKING FROM LONG-STANDING U.S.
POLICY, MR. TRUMP SPOKE WITH
TAIWANESE PRESIDENT TSAI ING-WEN
YESTERDAY FOR TEN MINUTES.
THIS WAS THE FIRST PUBLICLY
REPORTED PHONE CALL BETWEEN A
TAIWANESE LEADER AND AN AMERICAN
PRESIDENT OR PRESIDENT-ELECT IN
37 YEARS.
THAT'S BECAUSE THE U.S.
OFFICIALLY BROKE OFF DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS WITH TAIWAN IN 1979
AFTER FORMALLY RECOGNIZING
CHINA.
CHINA CONSIDERS THE ISLAND 115
MILES OFF THE MAINLAND TO BE
CHINESE TERRITORY, AND TODAY
CHINA LODGED A FORMAL DIPLOMATIC
PROTEST.
CHINA'S FOREIGN MINISTER BLAMED
TAIWAN FOR WHAT HE CALLED A
"PETTY ACTION."
>> (translated): I BELIEVE
THAT IT WON'T CHANGE THE
LONGSTANDING "ONE CHINA" POLICY
OF THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT.
>> Stewart: MR. TRUMP SAID ON
TWITTER THAT PRESIDENT TSAI
CALLED HIM TO CONGRATULATE HIM
ON HIS ELECTION VICTORY.
A SPOKESMAN FOR THE TAIWANESE
PRESIDENT CONFIRMED TSAI
INITIATED THE CALL FOLLOWING A
PREARRANGED PROCEDURE.
MR. TRUMP DEFENDED THE CALL,
TWEETING:
THE PRESIDENT-ELECT ALSO SPOKE
WITH THE CONTROVERSIAL PRESIDENT
OF THE PHILIPPINES, RODRIGO
DUTERTE.
DUTERTE SAYS TRUMP WISHED HIM
WELL WITH HIS EXTRA-JUDICIAL
CRACKDOWN ON DRUG TRAFFICKERS,
WHICH HAS CLAIMED SOME 5,000
LIVES THIS YEAR.
PRESIDENT OBAMA, THE UNITED
NATIONS AND HUMAN RIGHTS GROUPS
HAVE RAISED CONCERNS ABOUT THE
CRACKDOWN.
FACING A DEADLINE TO LEAVE,
PROTESTERS OF AN OIL PIPELINE
UNDER CONSTRUCTION IN NORTH
DAKOTA ARE GETTING SUPPORT THIS
WEEKEND FROM U.S. MILITARY
VETERANS.
ORGANIZERS FROM VETERANS STAND
FOR STANDING ROCK SAY 2,000 VETS
WERE HEADED TO THE SIOUX
STANDING ROCK RESERVATION.
THEIR LEADERS EXPECTED TO MEET
TODAY WITH TRIBAL ELDERS.
FOR MONTHS, PROTESTERS HAVE SAID
THE $4 BILLION PIPELINE, WHICH
WILL CARRY 500,000 BARRELS OF
OIL A DAY NEAR THE RESERVATION,
COULD POLLUTE ITS WATER SUPPLY
AND THREATEN NATIVE AMERICAN
SACRED SITES.
THE U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS
AND NORTH DAKOTA'S GOVERNOR HAVE
ORDERED THE PROTESTERS TO VACATE
THEIR ENCAMPMENTS ON THE FEDERAL
LAND THEY'RE OCCUPYING BY
MONDAY.
CITING MILLIONS OF DEATHS A YEAR
FROM AIR POLLUTION WORLDWIDE,
FOUR MAJOR CITIES HAVE PLEDGED
TO BAN DIESEL VEHICLES BY 2025.
READ MORE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
ITALIANS VOTE TOMORROW IN A
REFERENDUM TO CHANGE THEIR POST-
WORLD WAR II CONSTITUTION IN THE
HOPES OF ALLEVIATING THE
GRIDLOCK THAT PLAGUES THE
COUNTRY'S CENTRAL GOVERNMENT.
ITALY'S PRIME MINISTER FOR MOST
OF THE PAST THREE YEARS, MATTEO
RENZI, SAYS HE'LL RESIGN IF THE
REFERENDUM FAILS.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRISTOPHER
LIVESAY JOINS ME FROM ROME TO
DISCUSS THE REFERENDUM AND ITS
POTENTIAL IMPACT ON THE EUROPEAN
UNION.
CHRISTOPHER, WHAT ARE THE
DRIVING FORCES BEHIND "YES" ON
THE REFERENDUM, "LET'S CHANGE
THE WAY THE GOVERNMENT WORKS"?
AND WHAT'S THE DRIVING FORCES
BEHIND "NO, LET'S NOT DO THAT"?
>> THE IDEA BEHIND VOTING YES IS
QUITE SIMPLE.
IT'S TO CHANGE THE CONSTITUTION,
TO ULTIMATELY STREAMLINE THE
POLITICAL SYSTEM HERE.
ITALY IS NOTORIOUSLY DIFFICULT
TO GOVERN.
IT'S HAD 63 GOVERNMENTS IN THE
LAST 70 YEARS.
ONE OF THE MAIN REASONS FOR THAT
IS, IF YOU WANT TO PASS A LAW,
IT TENDS TO GET STUCK BETWEEN
BOTH A SENATE AND A HOUSE.
AND THE IDEA WOULD BE TO SHRINK
THE SENATE SO YOU MAKE THE HOUSE
A LITTLE MORE POWERFUL, AND YOU
CAN GET A LAW THROUGH THAT WAY
AND GENERATE MORE STABILITY IN
THE ITALIAN GOVERNMENT, AND WITH
MORE GOVERNMENTAL STABILITY, THE
IDEA IS YOU WOULD HAVE MORE
ECONOMIC STABILITY AS WELL.
THE PEOPLE VOTING NO ON THIS ARE
UPSET WITH THE POWERS THIS WOULD
GIVE TO THE PRIME MINISTER.
THE CONSTITUTION IN ITALY, AS
YOU MENTIONED, CAME AFTER WORLD
WAR II.
YOU HAVE TO THINK ABOUT WHO WAS
IN CHARGE IN ITALY DURING WORLD
WAR II AND BEFORE WORLD WAR II.
THAT WAS NONE OTHER THAN THE
DICTATOR BENITO MUSSOLINI.
SO THE CONSTITUTION WAS WRITTEN
IN A WAY TO KEEP THE PRIME
MINISTER FROM BECOMING TOO
POWERFUL, BUT IN THE PROCESS,
IT'S GENERATED A LOT OF
GRIDLOCK.
THERE'S STILL A LARGE PORTION OF
THE ITALIAN ELECTORATE THAT'S
STILL UNDECIDED.
IT'S ABOUT 30% OF ITALIANS STILL
DON'T KNOW WHICH WAY THEY'RE
GOING TO VOTE ON THIS THING.
>> Stewart: ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT'S INTERESTING ABOUT THIS
ELECTION IS THE DOMINO EFFECT IT
COULD HAVE IF REMZI DOES,
INDEED, RESIGN, AND THEN THIS
OPENS IT UP FOR OTHERS TO TAKE
HIS PLACE.
OBVIOUSLY, THE FIVE-STAR
MOVEMENT IS THE ONE WE'RE
HEARING A LOT ABOUT.
TELL US A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE
FIVE-STAR MOVEMENT, WHO SUPPORTS
IT, AND WHO ITS LEADER IS.
>> IT'S A CATCH-ALL PARTY.
THEY TEND TO OPPOSE ANYTHING
THAT THE GOVERNMENT PROPOSES,
BUT ONE THING THAT WE CAN SAY
ABOUT THEM IS THAT THEY'RE
POPULIST, THEY'RE
ANTI-ESTABLISHMENT, AND THEY'RE
ANTI-EURO.
THE LEADER OF THIS PARTY IS
BEPPE GRILLO, A CHARISMATIC
STAND-UP COMIC.
HE IS SORT OF GLEEFULLY VULGAR
AND HAS A WAY OF JUST CONNECTING
WITH PEOPLE, UNLIKE ANY OTHER
POLITICIAN ON THE SCENE RIGHT
NOW.
THAT MIGHT RING A BELL WITH
VIEWERS IN THE UNITED STATES.
BEPPE GRILLO HAS PROPOSED GIVING
ITALIANS A REFERENDUM ON THEIR
MEMBERSHIP TO THE EURO ZONE, AND
THAT COULD SEND SOME SERIOUS
ECONOMIC SHOCKWAVES ALL ACROSS
THE COMMON CURRENCY AREA.
>> Stewart: CHRISTOPHER LIVESAY
FROM ITALY, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Stewart: IN DECEMBER 2014,
AFTER A FIVE-DECADE FREEZE,
PRESIDENT OBAMA ANNOUNCED THE
UNITED STATES WOULD BEGIN
REESTABLISHING DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS WITH CUBA.
ONE EXPECTED RESULT: EXPANDED
TRADE THAT WOULD BE AN ECONOMIC
PAYOFF FOR BOTH COUNTRIES.
BUT THE LONG-STANDING U.S.
EMBARGO REMAINS IN EFFECT FOR
MOST ECONOMIC SECTORS, AND
CUBA'S GOVERNMENT HAS BEEN SLOW
TO APPROVE NEW DEALS.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT AMY
GUTTMAN REPORTS THAT TWO YEARS
ON, U.S./CUBA TRADE HAS A LONG
WAY TO GO.
>> Reporter: VISITORS TO CUBA
MAY FIND THE LACK OF
MODERNIZATION PART OF THE
COUNTRY'S CHARM, BUT, IF CUBAN
FARMERS AND AMERICAN INVESTORS
GET THEIR WAY, OXEN THAT STILL
TILL THESE FIELDS MAY FINALLY BE
REPLACED.
CUBAN-AMERICAN ENTREPRENEUR SAUL
BERENTHAL OWNS CLEBER, AN
ALABAMA-BASED TRACTOR
MANUFACTURING BUSINESS.
HE'S AMONG THE FIRST TO OBTAIN A
U.S. LICENSE TO EXPORT
AGRICULTURAL MACHINES, LIKE THE
ONES SEEN HERE, TO CUBA.
>> THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR US
TO GO BACK AND SEE, IN MY MIND,
HOW WE CAN HELP GETTING THE TWO
COMMUNITIES TOGETHER.
BECAUSE I BELIEVE THAT THROUGH
COMMERCE, THROUGH BUSINESS, AND
NOT POLITICS, IS THE BEST WAY OF
BRINGING THE PEOPLES TOGETHER.
>> Reporter: BERENTHAL ALSO
BELIEVES BETTER MACHINES WILL
HELP CUBANS DECREASE THEIR
DEPENDENCE ON IMPORTS, WHICH
ACCOUNT FOR 80% OF THE ISLAND'S
FOOD SUPPLY.
>> WHAT WE CHOSE WAS A TRACTOR
THAT WAS DESIGNED IN THE LATE
1940s FOR THE U.S. FAMILY FARM,
VERY MUCH LIKE WHAT YOU SEE HERE
AND VERY MUCH LIKE WHAT YOU SEE
THROUGHOUT THE WHOLE COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: CUBA HAS YET TO
APPROVE THE SALE OF BERENTHAL'S
TRACTORS.
WHEN IT DOES, HE PLANS TO SHIP
THEM ASSEMBLED.
BUT ONE DAY, HE HOPES TO SET UP
A FACTORY HERE SO CUBANS CAN
BUILD THEM.
BERENTHAL WAS BORN AND RAISED IN
HAVANA, THE SON OF EUROPEAN
IMMIGRANTS WHO FLED THE
HOLOCAUST.
HIS PARENTS WERE SUCCESSFUL
MERCHANTS WHO IMPORTED AMERICAN
PRODUCTS UNTIL THE CUBAN
REVOLUTION IN 1959, WHEN THEY
LEFT HAVANA FOR MIAMI.
>> THE SOCIALIST ECONOMIC MODEL
IS TO KEEP THE LAND IN THE HANDS
OF THE PEOPLE WHO WORK THE LAND,
AND THEREFORE EVERY CUBAN THAT
IS WILLING TO IS GIVEN X AMOUNT
OF LAND FOR THEM TO CULTIVATE,
AND THEY GET THE GOVERNMENT TO
BUY THEIR CROP.
AND WHAT WE'RE DOING IS TRYING
TO BRING SOME TECHNOLOGY THAT
WILL ALLOW THEM TO BECOME MORE
PRODUCTIVE WITH WHAT THEY DO.
>> Reporter: THE CUBAN
GOVERNMENT BUYS A PORTION OF
WHAT FARMERS PRODUCE TO STOCK
BODEGAS WHERE CUBANS USE RATION
CARDS TO BUY FOOD.
FARMERS CAN SELL THE REST AT
PRODUCE STANDS FOR CASH.
AGRICULTURE IS ONE OF THE
BIGGEST SECTORS TARGETED FOR
STRONGER TRADE WITH THE U.S.
SINCE A SANCTIONS REFORM ACT IN
2000, 13 STATES LED BY VIRGINIA,
ALABAMA AND LOUISIANA HAVE
EXPORTED TO CUBA LIMITED AMOUNTS
OF PRODUCTS LIKE SOYBEANS,
APPLES AND POULTRY.
THOSE SHIPMENTS TOPPED $150
MILLION IN THE FIRST NINE MONTHS
OF THIS YEAR.
AT THE SAME TIME, THE U.S.
ALLOWED CUBAN IMPORTS OF COFFEE
FOR THE FIRST TIME AND A GREATER
RANGE OF TEXTILES.
BUT CUBA'S LARGEST EXPORTS TO
OTHER COUNTRIES-- LIKE RUM,
TOBACCO, EXOTIC FRUIT AND
HONEY-- HAVE YET TO MAKE IT TO
THE U.S. MARKET DUE TO THE
CONTINUING EMBARGO.
ISIS SALCINES RUNS A 125-ACRE,
OR 300-HECTARE, ORGANIC
COOPERATIVE FARM CALLED VIVERO
ALAMAR.
140 PEOPLE WORK HERE.
>> Reporter: IS THE TRADE
EMBARGO THE OBSTACLE HERE TO
DEVELOPING THAT LAND?
>> Reporter: AMERICAN TRADE
DELEGATIONS REGULARLY VISIT THE
FARM, WHICH RAISES COWS AND
GROWS LETTUCE, SUGAR CANE AND
MORINGA TREES, WHOSE LEAVES ARE
PACKED WITH PROTEIN, CALCIUM AND
OTHER NUTRIENTS.
>> Reporter: WITHOUT MODERN
TOOLS, THE FARM USES ARDUOUS
TECHNIQUES.
FOR EXAMPLE, IT DOESN'T HAVE pH
METERS TO TEST WHETHER THE SOIL
IS TOO ACIDIC OR ALKALINE, SO
WORKERS COUNT OUT 100 WORMS
BEFORE PLACING THEM IN THE
GROUND FOR A FEW DAYS.
IF THE MAJORITY SURVIVE, THE pH
LEVELS ARE GOOD.
SO, WHAT ARE SOME OF THE THINGS
THAT YOU WOULD BUY FROM THE
AMERICAN MARKET IF YOU WERE ABLE
TO IMPORT THEM?
>> Reporter: HOW MUCH COULD YOU
INCREASE YOUR PRODUCTION HERE AT
THIS FARM IF YOU HAD A FEW OF
THE THINGS ON YOUR WISH LIST?
pH METERS, AS AN EXAMPLE.
>> Reporter: SINCE RAUL CASTRO
SUCCEEDED HIS BROTHER, FIDEL, AS
PRESIDENT IN 2008, THE CUBAN
GOVERNMENT HAS TAKEN SMALL STEPS
AWAY FROM THE COMMUNIST DOGMA
THAT DEFINED ITS REVOLUTION,
SOFTENING THE STATE MONOPOLY ON
DISTRIBUTING AGRICULTURAL GOODS,
ALLOWING CUBANS TO OWN THEIR
HOMES AND PERMITTING THEM TO RUN
THEIR OWN SHOPS AND RESTAURANTS.
DESPITE AN INCREASE IN SMALL
BUSINESSES, GREATER ACCESS TO
THE INTERNET AND OTHER CHANGES
HERE, CUBANS I'VE SPOKEN TO FEEL
THE PATH TOWARD TRADE WITH THE
UNITED STATES ISN'T DEVELOPING
FAST ENOUGH.
>> AS AN AMERICAN BUSINESSMAN,
I'D LIKE TO SEE... AND AS A
CONSULTANT FOR SOME AMERICAN
COMPANIES, I WOULD LIKE TO SEE
MORE PROGRESS.
>> Reporter: HUGO CANCIO FLED
CUBA FOR MIAMI WITH HIS MOTHER
AND SISTER IN 1982, WHEN HE WAS
JUST 16.
IN THE 1990s, WHEN THE U.S. AND
CUBA LET CUBAN-AMERICANS VISIT
RELATIVES ON THE ISLAND, CANCIO
SET UP A TRAVEL AGENCY IN MIAMI.
TODAY, HE ALSO PUBLISHES THE
ENGLISH-LANGUAGE BIMONTHLY
MAGAZINE "ON CUBA," WITH OFFICES
IN HAVANA.
>> I HAVE BEEN FOCUSED 100% ON
CUBA.
I'VE PUT ALL OF MY EMOTIONS AND
ENERGY INTO THIS WHOLE PROCESS
THAT WE'RE EXPERIENCING TODAY.
>> Reporter: CANCIO SAYS IN THE
PAST YEAR, THE EXPANSION OF
WESTERN UNION IN CUBA AND THE
APPROVAL OF COMMERCIAL AIRLINE
FLIGHTS FROM NINE AMERICAN
CITIES HAS MADE IT EASIER FOR
CUBANS TO ACCESS CASH.
IN ADDITION, REMITTANCES FROM
FRIENDS AND FAMILY IN THE U.S.
HIT A RECORD $3.3 BILLION LAST
YEAR.
WITH TRAVEL RESTRICTIONS EASED,
AMERICANS SPENT MORE THAN
$1 BILLION IN CUBA IN THE FIRST
SIX MONTHS OF THIS YEAR.
THE NUMBER OF U.S. TOURISTS
NEARLY DOUBLED.
TO MEET THE GROWING DEMAND,
AMERICAN AND INTERNATIONAL HOTEL
CHAINS ARE BUILDING OR
REMODELING PROPERTIES TYPICALLY
CO-OWNED BY THE CUBAN
GOVERNMENT, LIKE THE LA MANZANA
COMPLEX NEAR OLD HAVANA.
>> THIS PARK REPRESENTS THE OLD
AND THE NEW, AND I THINK WILL
CONTINUE TO DO SO.
>> Reporter: AND NOW, IT'S THE
FOREGROUND FOR THE MANY CRANES
AND BUILDING WORKS GOING ON.
>> CRANES MEAN PROSPERITY, YOU
KNOW, SOMETHING'S BREWING IN THE
ECONOMY.
THERE ARE COMPANIES THAT USED TO
BE HERE PRIOR TO 1959 WHOSE
PROPERTIES AND BUSINESSES WERE
NATIONALIZED OR CONFISCATED OR
EXPROPRIATED, AND THEY'RE
WILLING TO FORGIVE AND FORGET
THEIR CLAIMS AGAINST THE
CUBAN GOVERNMENT TO BE THE FIRST
ONE TO GET IN HERE AND SO FORTH.
IT'S TAKING A BIT TOO LONG AND
PEOPLE ARE READJUSTING THEIR
EXPECTATIONS.
>> Reporter: AMERICAN COMPANIES
EXPECTING TO DO BUSINESS IN CUBA
EXHIBITED AT HAVANA'S ANNUAL
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS FAIR IN
OCTOBER, INCLUDING GENERAL
ELECTRIC AND NAPA AUTO PARTS.
THEY JOIN A QUEUE OF FOREIGN
COMPANIES FROM CANADA TO CHINA
THAT HAVE BEEN INVESTING IN CUBA
FOR DECADES.
CANCIO WARNS THE CUBAN
GOVERNMENT IS CAUTIOUS TO AVOID
THE OVERDEPENDENCE ON AMERICA
THAT HELPED FUEL THE REVOLUTION.
>> REMEMBER, PART OF THE WHOLE
PROCESS THAT LED TO THE CUBAN
REVOLUTION WAS THE FACT THAT,
BACK IN 1959, THE CUBAN ECONOMY
WAS IN THE HANDS OF AMERICAN
BUSINESSES AND AMERICAN
INTERESTS.
THAT CUBA IS NOT COMING BACK.
>> Reporter: DESPITE THAT
CONCERN, RICARDO TORRES, AN
ECONOMIST AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
HAVANA'S CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF
THE CUBAN ECONOMY, SAYS THE U.S.
AND CUBA ARE NATURAL TRADING
PARTNERS.
>> CULTURALLY SPEAKING, THOSE
TWO COUNTRIES ARE MUCH CLOSER
THAN PROBABLY OTHER COUNTRIES.
AND THE FACT THERE ARE ALMOST
TWO MILLION CUBANS LIVING IN THE
UNITED STATES MEANS THAT THERE
IS A POWERFUL FORCE OUT THERE
THAT WILL, YOU KNOW, STICK THE
TWO COUNTRIES VERY CLOSE.
>> Reporter: IS THERE ANY
CONCERN THAT INTEREST FROM
FOREIGN INVESTORS WILL WANE IF
IT TAKES TOO LONG?
>> YES, THERE MIGHT BE A PROBLEM
WITH THAT.
WE NEED FACTS TO TELL PEOPLE
THAT WE ARE READY AND WE ARE
OPEN FOR BUSINESS.
>> Reporter: TORRES SAYS CUBA'S
CRUMBLING INFRASTRUCTURE IS AN
AREA RIPE FOR DEALS WITH
AMERICAN INVESTORS.
>> I THINK THERE ARE BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS TO BE INVESTED IN THAT
SECTOR OVER THE COMING DECADES.
WE ARE TALKING ABOUT ROADS, WE
ARE TALKING ABOUT RAILROADS, WE
ARE TALKING ABOUT AIRPORTS,
TALKING ABOUT PORTS, WE ARE
TALKING ABOUT
TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
>> Reporter: TORRES POINTS TO
THE SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE
ESTABLISHED AT THE PORT OF
MARIEL, AN HOUR OUTSIDE OF
HAVANA, WHICH HAS DRAWN FOREIGN
INVESTMENT MAINLY FROM BRAZIL
AND SINGAPORE.
IT'S A STATE OF THE ART
DEEPWATER PORT WITH HUGE
CONTAINER TERMINALS AND
WAREHOUSES.
PORT OFFICIALS FROM SEVERAL
AMERICAN STATES HAVE BEEN MAKING
VISITS HERE.
ALREADY, GOVERNMENT OFFICIALS
FROM VIRGINIA AND LOUISIANA HAVE
MADE FUTURE AGREEMENTS TO
FACILITATE TRADE BETWEEN THE
U.S. AND CUBA.
THOSE AGREEMENTS WILL RAMP UP
IMPORTS AND EXPORTS WHEN THE
EXISTING U.S. TRADE RESTRICTIONS
WITH CUBA ARE EASED.
MARIEL PORT OFFICIAL WENDY
BARROTO SAYS THE CUBAN
GOVERNMENT HAS OFFERED TAX
BREAKS, EXPEDITED PERMITS AND
BUILT A MONORAIL LINE TO ATTRACT
MORE FOREIGN COMPANIES.
>> (translated): THE TOTAL
COMPLETION FOR THIS AREA IS
ESTIMATED IN ABOUT 30 YEARS.
>> Reporter: WHAT INDUSTRIES ARE
YOU HOPING TO ATTRACT HERE?
>> (translated): THEY ARE
BASICALLY LOGISTICS SERVICES,
PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY,
BIOTECHNOLOGY AND ADVANCED
MANUFACTURING, WITH PRIORITY
GIVEN TO FOOD PROCESSING AND
PACKING, AND STEEL WORKS.
>> Reporter: WHILE AMERICAN
COMPANIES WAIT FOR THESE DEALS
TO GO THROUGH, SAUL BERENTHAL IS
OPTIMISTIC HIS TRACTORS WILL ONE
DAY PLOUGH CUBAN SOIL.
BERENTHAL SAYS HE UNDERSTANDS
WHY CUBA HAS BEEN SLOW TO TRUST
THE U.S.
>> THE DIFFICULTY LIES BETWEEN
DEVELOPING A TRUST WITH A
COUNTRY THAT ON ONE SIDE SAYS
"WE WANT TO DO BUSINESS WITH
YOU" AND ON THE OTHER SIDE HAS
AN EMBARGO THAT FORBIDS
PRACTICALLY ANY ACTIVITY IN THE
BUSINESS WORLD.
>> Reporter: SO, YOU'RE HOPEFUL
THAT EVENTUALLY YOUR TRACTORS
WILL COME TO CUBA.
>> IN TIME, WITH THE PROPER
POLITICAL CHANGES THAT MUST BE
PUT IN PLACE, YES.
>> Stewart: IN EUROPE, ANTI-
ESTABLISHMENT, POPULIST
POLITICAL PARTIES ARE ON THE
RISE NOT ONLY IN ITALY, AS WE
DISCUSSED EARLIER IN THE
BROADCAST, BUT ALSO IN FRANCE,
ENGLAND, GERMANY AND AUSTRIA.
AUSTRIANS VOTE IN THEIR
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION TOMORROW,
WHICH IS A DO-OVER OF THE
ELECTION HELD IN MAY THAT WAS
NULLIFIED OVER VOTING
IRREGULARITIES.
THE LEFT-LEANING INDEPENDENT
CANDIDATE, ALEXANDER VAN DER
BELLEN, IS RUNNING AGAINST
NORBERT HOFER OF THE RIGHT WING
"FREEDOM PARTY," WHO OPPOSES
BENEFITS FOR MIGRANTS AND IS
CRITICAL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION.
FRANCOIS MURPHY IS THE BUREAU
CHIEF FOR REUTERS IN VIENNA, AND
HE JOINS ME NOW TO DISCUSS THIS
ELECTION.
FRANCOIS, IN EVERY ARTICLE ABOUT
THE AUSTRIAN ELECTION, YOU ALSO
READ A SENTENCE ABOUT BREXIT,
THE U.K. EXIT FROM EUROPE, AND
ABOUT THE ELECTION OF DONALD
TRUMP AS PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES.
IS THERE A SENSE THAT AUSTRIA
WILL FOLLOW IN THIS LINE OF
REJECTING ESTABLISHMENT PARTIES
AND PEOPLE AND GO
ANTI-ESTABLISHMENT?
>> WELL, YOU COULD ALSO ARGUE
THAT IT'S ACTUALLY BRITAIN AND
AMERICA THAT WERE FOLLOWING
AUSTRIA SINCE, AS YOU MENTIONED,
THIS IS A RE-RUN OF AN ELECTION
THAT WAS FIRST HELD IN MAY.
AND IN MAY, THE FAR-RIGHT
CANDIDATE, NORBERT HOFER, CAME
VERY, VERY CLOSE TO WINNING.
SO IN A WAY IT'S VERY HARD TO
SAY WHICH WAY THIS WAVE IS
HEADED IN.
>> Stewart: WHERE ARE THE
LINES DIVIDED IN THE COUNTRY?
WHO IS VOTING FOR WHOM?
>> THERE IS ACTUALLY A VERY
SIMILAR PICTURE TO WHAT WE HAVE
SINCE SEEN IN BRITAIN AND IN THE
UNITED STATES.
DATA FROM THE ORIGINAL RERUN IN
MAY SHOWS THAT YOU HAD
BLUE-COLLAR WORKERS LARGELY
VOTING FOR NORBERT HOFER, THE
FAR-RIGHT CANDIDATE, WHEREAS THE
HIGHLY EDUCATED, FOR EXAMPLE,
WERE LARGELY BACKING ALEXANDER
VAN DER BELLEN, THE FORMER
LEADER OF THE GREENS PARTY.
>> Stewart: FRANCOIS, IS THERE
ANTI-E.U. SENTIMENT INVOLVED IN
THE AUSTRIAN ELECTION?
>> I'M NOT SURE IT'S FAIR TO SAY
THAT THIS IS DRIVEN BY ANTI-E.U.
SENTIMENT.
IN FACT, THE FAR-RIGHT
CANDIDATE, NORBERT HOFER, SAID
AUSTRIA COULD HOLD ITS OWN
VOTE ON LEAVING THE EUROPEAN
UNION IN A YEAR AND THAT HASN'T
GONE DOWN TOO WELL IN AUSTRIA,
WHERE MOST PEOPLE, ACCORDING TO
OPINION POLLS, FEEL THAT THE
COUNTRY SHOULD STAY WITHIN THE
E.U.
>> Stewart: IF NORBERT HOFER
SHOULD WIN, WHAT COULD HE DO?
WHAT CHANGES COULD HE MAKE?
>> SO, IN AUSTRIA, THE PRESIDENT
TRADITIONALLY PLAYS A LARGELY
CEREMONIAL ROLE.
PRESIDENTIAL POWERS, HOWEVER,
ARE QUITE BROADLY DEFINED, AND
IT'S POSSIBLE TO INTERPRET THOSE
IN A LARGER WAY.
AND THAT'S WHAT NORBERT HOFER
HAS SAID HE INTENDS TO DO.
HE HAS SAID THAT HE WOULD
DISMISS A GOVERNMENT THAT
BEHAVED IN A CERTAIN WAY.
HE'S GIVEN A COUPLE OF EXAMPLES.
AT LEAST ONE IS IF THE
GOVERNMENT WERE TO RAISE TAXES.
ANOTHER IS IF A GOVERNMENT
ALLOWED ANOTHER INFLUX OF
MIGRANTS LIKE THE ONE WE SAW
HERE JUST OVER A YEAR AGO WHERE,
AT THE TIME, THERE WERE NO I.D.
CHECKS, FOR EXAMPLE, OF PEOPLE
COMING THROUGH, AND HE SAYS IF
SOMETHING LIKE THAT WERE TO
HAPPEN AGAIN, HE WOULD DISMISS
THE GOVERNMENT.
>> Stewart: FRANCOIS MURPHY OF
REUTERS, THANKS FOR JOINING US
FROM VIENNA.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Stewart: FINALLY, IRAN
SHARPLY CRITICIZED THE UNITED
STATES TODAY FOR EXTENDING
UNILATERAL ECONOMIC SANCTIONS
FOR TEN MORE YEARS.
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS EXPECTED TO
SIGN THE BILL APPROVED BY
CONGRESS THIS WEEK.
IRAN'S FOREIGN MINISTER SAYS THE
EXTENSION VIOLATES THE NUCLEAR
DISARMAMENT DEAL IMPLEMENTED
THIS YEAR BY THE U.S. AND OTHER
WORLD POWERS.
U.S. OFFICIALS SAY THE SANCTIONS
DON'T BREACH THE PACT, WHICH
LIFTED CERTAIN INTERNATIONAL
SANCTIONS ON IRAN.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M ALISON STEWART.
GOOD NIGHT.